---
published: false
---
#Launching a personal website

Background: I had a fat bucketlist that I needed to start working on. Some of the items on that last included setting up a personal website, a professional email, brushing up on html and css, practicing with some css frameworks, and keeping better records of the projects I was working on. I also bought a Chromebook a few months ago and I was really enjoying the freedom of working away from my desk. And so the obvious solution to most of those items was to set up a blog that I could add content to from anywhere. 

My first instinct was to make a website using WordPress and it seemed perfect, there was a large community to get help with questions, there were a bunch of themes to pick from, and there was a simple interface that I could access from anywhere to make new posts. It looked great at first, and I was under the impression that a Content Management System (CMS) was the only way to manage blog posts aside from copy and pasting code every time I wanted to make a new post. So believing I had no other choice aside from looking into systems such as Drupal or Joomla or some other CMS, I began looking for a theme. 

Unfortunatly with the advent of theme market places most well developed themes have a lot of bulk so that they can be used for every single project under the sun. And the themes that are specialized, aren't very popular, and consequently don't recieve much developement or updates. On top of all that most themes were also accompanied by atleasta  couple plugins in order to function. WordPress also needed to be constantly maintained due to the fact that it has a huge surface area for security exploits as a result of users having to rely on all sorts of different technologies, most of which are third party solutions. 

Developing a WordPress theme required me to first create the website and then split it into "partials," which would then be glued back together with php in order to generate a website everytime a user visited a page. This is a system that is used by just about every modern CMS, but the issue was that I had to first create the theme on a local environment and then transfer it the live environment on my hosting service. It's not the pretiest workflow at all, and there were a whole bunch of php bugs (most likely just a result of me being inexpierienced). The biggest flaw that got me looking into other solutions was the fact that it was just so damn slow and I didn't even have any plugins yet. The whole system just felt sluggish to me. 

Soon after my last attempt at wrestling with WordPress I learned about the magic of static site generators. These services work similar to CMSes such as WordPress in that you define what the different parts of the websites look like (typically areas that don't change such as the header, sidebar, and footer) and then create posts that which are glued together with the other pieces. The  thing is that unlike other systems SSGs don't rely on server side technologies and everything is created when the website is uploaded. This means that the webservers don't have to do as much work in delivering content to users. SSGs are typically lighter than dynamic websites as well,and since they don't require php to function they also have a smaller surface area for security vulnerabilities. Basically they lack in moving parts and thus don't break as often and don't require nearly as much maintenance. 

Since SSGs are just getting popular I decided to pick one of the popular ones since they would have a larger community and documentation. I was looking at HUGO, an SSG built with the GO language by some developers at Google and Jekyll, an SSG that is very well supported by Github, which also offers native integration.

I wanted a set up that would allow me to work from my Chromebook, but the issue with both systems is that they relied on the terminal for compiling. However, the thing is that Github allows users to host websites that are compiled on their end with Jekyll... meaning I wouldn't need to use the terminal. As a side note it is very simple to setup an environemt on chromeos to handle this compiling work, I just don't like the idea of using chrobuntu since chromeos is so light and fast. 

So that's how I settled on using Jekyll as my static site generator and using Github as mmy new web hosting service. This also meant I could ditch my hosting plan with inmotionhosting and save myself a bunch of gyro money every year. 


















