---
published: false
---
# Launching a personal website

## Preface: 
I bought a personal domain last summer and I wasn't doing anything with it; I wanted to set up a small website with my contact information and a blog where I could document my work. I also needed to brush up on frontend languages (html, css, javascript).

### Requirements:
I started with a list of things I wanted to accomplish with the website.
- minimalist/brutalist design
- cheap and fast hosting
- no javascript unless absolutely needed
- semantic code
- a frontpage with contact info
- blog homepage with a list of posts
- content first blog posts
- fluid design
- easy to add content from a Chromebook (Toshiba CB2 i3), without hacks
- light enough to run on a tamagotchi

## The solution: Jekyll + Github
My biggest concern was making sure I could add content from my Chromebook. I didn't want to hand code a new page every time I wanted to make a blog post. WordPress and other CMSes are great for managing content as they typically have a web interface to add new content. The issue however, is that they are multipurpose solutions that have a lot of bloat. They are great for much larger projects that need a lot of dynamic content such as a marketplace, or a forum that requires a database for manaing user information. For a simple blog however, a Static Site Generator (SSG) is much more appropriate.

### Content Management Systems vs Static Site Generators
A typical blog typically does not have many moving parts. Most ussually do not require a user to login as the author is the only one adding content. Even the content section of a website is essentially a static aection of a website. CMSes and Static Site Generators both require a website's design to be split into static components that can later be put back together with the dynamic content. In my case the dynamic content is a blog post, the text. All of my pages will have the same navigation menus, the same header, and footer and so they are my static components.

Most CMSes use a database to hold the blog posts, which is really just some metadata on when it was written, and the actual text. A static Site Generator takes the contents in a specially marked "posts" folder and combines each post with the static components such as the header and footer which are kept in another specially marked "partials" folder. The biggest difference between the two however is where this "combining" or rather compiling takes place. A CMS like WordPress does on the server-side with php or something similar. An SSG on the other hand typically requires the author to do the compiling with some terminal commands. Keyword is typically. 

### Why Jekyll

There are a bunch of SSGs to choose from, some of the most popular include Jekyll and HUGO; they are built with Ruby and Go respectively. HUGO is known for being the fastest generator because it compiles a complete website faster than its competitors. So the obvious choice for me at first was to just go along with HUGO. But then I realized the limitations posed by a Chromebook; I can't use the terminal without some hacks. But then I found out that GitHub has a lot of integration with Jekyll behind the scenes. If you upload all of your Jekyll files such as the static components you can just upload blog posts from literally any browser and GitHub will do the compiling for you. That means that I don't have to touch the terminal at all from my Chromebook. Although of course since you can access a GitHub respository through the terminal you can still use the terminal if it more convenient. 
